PRESENTER NAME: Liam Miller.
The first moral theory we will look at is utilitarianism.
Utilitarianism is a consequentialist moral theory.
As the name implies, this theory evaluates the consequences of an action to judge its
moral worth.
But how do we evaluate consequence?
Jeremy Bentham, who coined the term Utilitarianism, argued that anything that was pleasurable
was good, and anything that was painful was bad.
Further to this, he argued that what mattered the most was the net amount of pleasure generated
from everybody concerned.
Whichever action generated the most net pleasure overall, minus any pain overall, was the right
action.
There are two factors at play here: Hedonistic values and maximising the good overall.
First, to say that Bentham was a hedonist is to say that he was only concerned with
attaining pleasure and avoiding pain.
Bentham believed that all pleasures were created equally.
If I got immense pleasure from watching the Lord of the Rings movies, and my friend got
an equal amount of pleasure from reading the books, Bentham would be happy to rank these
actions as both comparatively good.
Second, in maximising the good, Bentham was concerned not just with individuals, but with
everyone.
He wanted to maximise the overall good.
Everyone is equally important in these calculations.
Let’s say, for example, my friend and I want to watch a movie but are having trouble
agreeing on what to watch.
I want to watch The Lord of the Rings, whereas my friend wants to watch Love, Actually.
We’re going to use what Bentham called Hedonic calculus to figure out what movie to see.
I gain a lot of pleasure from lord of the rings.
We might say it generates 10 Hedons of pleasure.
However, my friend hates these movies, and watching it causes her an equal amount of
pain.
We might say her pain generates -10 hedons.
Based on this quick calculation, that action would have a value of 0.
It would generate an equal amount of pain to pleasure.
However, if we watch Love Actually, the calculations are different.
My friend loves this movie, so it generates 10 Hedons.
I don’t love it, but don’t hate it either, so it generates -5 hedons for me.
In total, then, this action would generate 5 hedons.
So, when evaluating which movie to watch, the clear winner is the one that generates
more hedons overall.
Hedonic Calculus is a way of evaluating the consequences of different possible actions
and deciding which maximises the overall pleasure and minimises the overall pain.
Bentham’s evaluations were based on 7 categories: intensity, duration, certainty, nearness,
fruitfulness, purity, and extent.
John Stuart Mill is the other big name in Utilitarianism.
He agreed with many of Bentham’s ideas, but was very critical of how he saw pleasure
and pain.
For Mill, not all pleasures were created equal.
There are two types of pleasures for Mill, Higher and lower.
[CLICK The lower pleasures are things like eating
and drinking, physical affection, and a warm bed on a cold night.
The higher, and more superior pleasures, are things like the pursuit of knowledge, reading,
engaging in moral problems, creativity, and aesthetics.
Mill argued that Bentham’s moral theory was a ‘Pig Philosophy’, where we would
have to assume that a happy pig was better off than a slightly dissatisfied Socrates.
For Mill’s part, he would rather be Socrates dissatisfied than a pig satisfied.
In other words, Mill argued the lower pleasures in life could not generate as much good as
the higher pleasures.
Being slightly dissatisfied but engaged in higher pleasures was worth more than being
blissful but rolling in mud.